# Title: Brain computer interface: A way towards cyborgism
**Author:** Jadhav Sanjivani, S and Brinda, V and Journal, Indian
**Year:** 2013
**Filename:** files/4122/APPICON Abstracts.pdf
**Keywords count:** -3

Nanoparticles for the purpose of drug delivery have definite advantages because of their high stability, high carrier capacity and feasibility of incorporation of both hydrophilic & hydrophobic substances. The nanoencapsulated forms of drugs, due to their improved pharmacokinetic properties are expected to show higher efficacies and low MICs against the microorganisms and animal model infections as compared to conventional drugs. Therefore, the present study was aimed to evaluate the efficacy of topical nanoparticulated sparfloxacin and plain sparfloxacin in the experimental model of corneal ulcer. Washed diachema membrane was kept on each cell of diffusion chamber fitted with continuous slow injector. Transmembranne resistance confirmed intact membrane. Speed was maintained at 160 mins / inch. Chamber was maintained at 360C. Hundred ml (300 ug sparfloaxin equivalent) of drug was loaded in each cell. Samples were collected in a pre-weighed microcentrifuge tube at ½ ,1,2,4,6,7 & 24 hrs. They were reweighed and volume was determined via density calculation. Collected samples were stored at 70 0C till further analysis by HPLC. Eight white albino rabbits weighing 1.5-2 kg body weight were procured from Institute's Animal House after the approval of the Institute's Animal Ethics Committee for the use of corneal ulcer efficacy study. Sterile saline (0.05 ml) containing Staph, aureus 5x106 **CF**U per ml was injected in the cornea for the induction of corneal ulcer. Cornea was anaesthetized with 4% xylocaine before performing the intra-stromal delivery of the inoculums. Therapy was initiated after 18 hrs of the inoculation. The rabbits, which were having at least grade 1 ulcer, were included in the study. Each rabbit received 50 ul of either 0.1% w/v nanoparticulated sparfloxacin formulation or plain 0.3% sparfloxacin eye drop four times a day. Treatment was given for 4 weeks,. In our in vitro release study of nanoparticulated sparfloxacin, it was found that Formulation IV (sparfloxacin 8% loaded) was found to be the best which was used for the in vivo kinetic study. While comparing the percentage healing that occurred after two weeks of therapy, (using the ulcer size) nanoparticulated sparfloxacin (0.1% sparfloxacin) showed 100% healing over the period of 4 weeks treatment, which was found to be statistically significant (p<0.01), when compared to the plain sparfloxacin. Nanoparticulated sparfloxacin has been shown to possess 15 times low MIC 90 value as compared to plain sparfloxacin against Staph. aureus. This study showed that nanoparticulated formulation may be having potential use in ocular drug therapy.

Indian boundaries are delimited by diverse geographical locations ranging from frozen Himalayan **peak**s lacking oxygen to hot and dry deserts to hot and humid coastal areas to dense jungles. Indian soldiers are deployed in these varied environmental conditions and are subject to the detrimental effects of these extreme environmental excesses. In addition, the noise and radiation exposure of the troops is a significant occupational hazard. The troops of the Indian Defence Forces are not only expected to survive these extremes but also to perform physically and mentally to discharge their military duties effectively.

Results: Highly Significant difference was found in double amplitude or predictable change of blood pressure between night and day shift (p<0.001). Very interesting patterns of systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure and heart rate of acrophase were found during night shift, however during day shift incomplete recovery was found in 6 subjects. Ecphasia (odd timing of circadian pattern of blood pressure not of heart rate) was also found in few subjects. Alteration in hyperbaric index of SBP and DBP was found during night and day shift. During night shift, hyperbaric index of mean systolic blood pressure was found to be increased at 00-03 am (midnight) however in day shift, **peak** was found at 06-09 am (early morning). During night shift hyperbaric baric index of mean heart rate was peak at 18-21 pm while during day shift peak was at 06-09 am. Evening cortisol level did not show a significant pattern (p>0.05).Highly significant difference was found in night cortisol levels (p<0.001) due to recovery during day shift. Alteration in mean morning cortisol level was also found however, this pattern was not highly significant. Night melatonin level was found declined as compared to morning level. Altered melatonin levels were found in night and in the morning samples during night shift.

Nanoparticles for the purpose of drug delivery have definite advantages because of their high stability, high carrier capacity and feasibility of incorporation of both hydrophilic & hydrophobic substances. The nanoencapsulated forms of drugs, due to their improved pharmacokinetic properties are expected to show higher efficacies and low MICs against the microorganisms and animal model infections as compared to conventional drugs. Therefore, the present study was aimed to evaluate the efficacy of topical nanoparticulated sparfloxacin and plain sparfloxacin in the experimental model of corneal ulcer. Washed diachema membrane was kept on each cell of diffusion chamber fitted with continuous slow injector. Transmembranne resistance confirmed intact membrane. Speed was maintained at 160 mins / inch. Chamber was maintained at 360C. Hundred ml (300 ug sparfloaxin equivalent) of drug was loaded in each cell. Samples were collected in a pre-weighed microcentrifuge tube at ½ ,1,2,4,6,7 & 24 hrs. They were reweighed and volume was determined via density calculation. Collected samples were stored at 70 0C till further analysis by HPLC. Eight white albino rabbits weighing 1.5-2 kg body weight were procured from Institute's Animal House after the approval of the Institute's Animal Ethics Committee for the use of corneal ulcer efficacy study. Sterile saline (0.05 ml) containing Staph, aureus 5x106 **CF**U per ml was injected in the cornea for the induction of corneal ulcer. Cornea was anaesthetized with 4% xylocaine before performing the intra-stromal delivery of the inoculums. Therapy was initiated after 18 hrs of the inoculation. The rabbits, which were having

Indian boundaries are delimited by diverse geographical locations ranging from frozen Himalayan **peak**s lacking oxygen to hot and dry deserts to hot and humid coastal areas to dense jungles. Indian soldiers are deployed in these varied environmental conditions and are subject to the detrimental effects of these extreme environmental excesses. In addition, the noise and radiation exposure of the troops is a significant occupational hazard. The troops of the Indian Defence Forces are not only expected to survive these extremes but also to perform physically and mentally to discharge their military duties effectively.

Background: Mortality due to cardiovascular diseases like myocardial infarction is more common as age advances, and **peak**s during winter, more so in the early hours of the day. Such cold climatic conditions trigger acute physiological responses such as an increase in blood pressure and vasoconstriction, which become more pronounced with advancing age.

Methods: Mitochondrial viability and membrane potential were evaluated by 3-(4,5-dimethythiazol-2-yl)2,5-diphenyl-tetrazolium (MTT) and JC-1 respectively. Oxidative damage induced by ALS-CSF on spinal cord mitochondria was assessed by Dichlorofluorescin diacetate (D**CF**DA), hydrogen peroxide and superoxide dismutase levels. Alteration of mitochondrial proteins was assessed by quantitative proteomics. Enzyme activities of respiratory chain complexes were assessed. TUNEL and caspase-3 expression were studied in NSC-34 motor neuron cells.

The incidence of hypertension continues to increase, largely because it progressively damages the cardiovascular system.Pre-hypertensive blood pressure levels are also associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD).Endothelium secretes endothelium-derived relaxing factors (EDRF) as well as endothelium-derived constricting factors (ED**CF**).Both collectively mediate the vasomotor tone.Prostacylin is produced by endothelial cells,while thromboxane A2 by platelets from their common precursor arachidonic acid via the cyclo-oxygenase pathway.Thromboxane A2 promotes platelet aggregation and vasoconstriction,whereas prostacyclin inhibits platelet aggregation and it has potent vasodilatory,anti-growth and anti-thrombotic actions. Endothelium plays a crucial role in the genesis of atherosclerosis,hypertension etc.

Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted on 60 patients with complaints of dyspnea, attending the outdoor department and indoor ward of respiratory medicine, RIMS Imphal. The study includes both the sexes. The patients are graded on the dyspnea scale of Modified Medical Research Council (MMRC) Dyspnea Scale and Spirometric lung function test done at the time of presentation. Pulmonary function test parameters include Forced Vital capacity (FVC), Forced Expiratory Volume in first second (FEV1), FEV1/FVC, **Peak** Expiratory Flow Rate (PEFR), Forced Expiration Flow rate (FEF25-75%). The results are compared with the predicted against the different gradings of dyspnea.

Methodology: The present cross sectional study was conducted among 231 subjects,of both genders, aged between 20 to 60 years, residing in their respective present localities for 10 years. Medical and exposure history were collected and anthropometric measurements were taken. Pulmonary functions (forced vital capacity [FVC], forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1] and **peak** expiratory flow rate [PEFR]) were measured using a portable spirometer.

Results: There was significant antinociception with venlafaxine as compared to normal saline with onset of action at 30 minutes and **peak** effect occurring at 90 minutes (P<0.05). The activity of venlafaxine was not comparable to that of morphine (P< 0.05) at 30, 60, 90 mins.The blockade of opioid receptors with naloxone, an opioid receptor antagonist showed no significant difference between control and venlafaxine with naloxone.

Methods: 100 patients undergoing abdominal surgery under general anaesthesia (50 LS & 50 LT) were tested for pulmonary functions (Forced Vital Capacity [FVC], Forced Expiratory Volume at first second [FEV1], **Peak** Expiratory Flow [PEF] and Forced Expiratory Flow at 25% to 75% [FEF 25%-75% ]) and blood gas analysis (pO2 and pCO2) before surgery and on the second postoperative day.

Results: Only hydroxyl radical treated cells showed changes in shape and evidence of opacity or nuclear fragmentation. Raman **peak**s related to proteins and nucleic acids progressively decreased till 60 min. However, when ascorbate and hydroxyl radicals were applied together, the morphological changes in neurons were minimal and the Raman peaks decreased initially but later recovered back to control level.

Study of **Peak** Expiratory Flow Rate [PEFR] in the residents surrounding puffed rice industries

Correlation of anthropometric parameters with **Peak** Expiratory Flow Rate

Method: The study has been carried out on 150 healthy females & males of 18 to 25 years of age. Informed consent taken, Their PEFR is measured with the help of mini Wrights **Peak** Flow Meter. Three PEFR readings were taken from each individual and the best of the three readings was considered. Subjects were categorized into groups based on their differences in height, weight and BMI. The variations of PEFR with respect to height, weight and BMI were determined separately. Unpaired t-test was used for analysis.

Comparative study of cardiovascular fitness (Vo2max),Body mass index (BMI),Body flexibility and **Peak**anaerobic power in female medical students amongst two ethnic groups

Methods: Body mass Index (BMI.),Waist to Hip ratio (W/H ratio),Shoulder ­wrist flexibility, Hip trunk flexibility, **Peak**-anaerobic power and cardiovascular fitness (Vo2 max)were studied in 62 Indian and 45 Malaysian female medical students.

Results: It was observed that BMI.,W/H ratio and Vo2 max parameters were within the normal limits in both the groups .However values of Hip trunk flexibility and **Peak**- anaerobic power parameters were significantly reduced in both the groups.

Conclusion: compared to Malaysian students Indian students were having lower values of physical fitness . Hip trunk flexibility and **Peak**- anaerobic power parameters were significantly reduced in both the groups. Which indicates that physical fitness shows decline in Indian students. This is pilot study .Large scale study is required to confirm the findings.

KEY Words : Body mass Index (BMI.), Waist to Hip ratio (W/H ratio), Body flexibility, **Peak**-anaerobic power, cardiovascular fitness (Vo2 max)

Results: **Peak** torque during isometric muscle function was significantly lower in middle aged group compared to young adult group. Isokinetic peak torque at 60, 120, and 180 were significantly lower in middle age group. Muscle mass, muscle volume and percentage body fat was higher in middle age group compared to young adult group. There was positive association between muscle mass and muscle strength (r= .67, p= .001).

Methods: A total of 132 apparently healthy age and sex matched subjects 66 cement factory workers who were directly exposed to cement dust and 66 subjects from general population of Bagalkot were selected. Forced expiratory spirograms were recorded by Helios 401 hand held portable computerized spirometer [M/s Recorders & Medicare Systems Ltd. India]. Parameters such as Forced Vital Capacity[FVC], Forced Expiratory Volume in 1st second [FEV1], the ratio of FEV1/FVC, Forced Expiratory Flow in the middle half of FVC[FEF ] 25-75% and **Peak** Expiratory Flow Rate [PEFR] were assessed and statistically analysed using students `t' test and ANOVA.

Methods: The present study was carried out in f 130 traffic policemen (Study group) and compared it with 130 healthy non traffic policemen (control group) in the age group 20-29 years, 30-39 years, 40-49 years and 50-59 years by computerised spirometer. The pulmonary function tests included : Vital capacity (VC), Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), **Peak** expiratory flow (PEF), Maximum voluntary ventilation (MVV), Forced expiratory flow at 25-75% of VC (FEF25-75%) and FEV1 as a percentage of VC (FEV1/VC)

Background: Cystic fibrosis (**CF**) is caused by mutations in a single large gene on chromosome 7 that encodes the cystic fibrosis trans membrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein. Although it is a multisystem disorder, progressive lung disease continues to be the major cause of morbidity and mortality.

Method: A total of 44 patients with moderate-to-severe COPD were classified into two Groups. In Control group, 21 COPD patients were recruited and they continued with their usual physical activity along with their routine medications for six weeks. In study group, 23 subjects were recruited and they practiced pranayamic breathing exercises namely Alternate Nostril Breathing, Right Nostril Breathing, and Left Nostril Breathing along with routine treatment for six weeks.The primary outcome measures were weight, FEV1, Dyspnoea scores, and **Peak** Vo2.Modified BODE scores were calculated from the above said outcome measures. These measures were evaluated again after 6 weeks in both the groups.

Results: After 6 weeks of pranayama in the study group, there was a significant reduction in BMI (P=0.037), increase in FEV1 values (P=0.0032), decrease in dyspnoea score (P=0.0162), increase in **peak** Vo 2 value (P<0.001) and decrease in Modified BODE index scores (P<0.001).

Introduction: **Peak** Expiratory Flow Rate (PEFR) measures how fast a person can exhale air. It is one of the many tests that measure how well our airways work. Various factors like age, gender, Body Mass Index, exercise, cardiac health and high altitudes alter PEFR.

Objective: To determine the relationship between pulmonary function by **peak** expiratory flow rate (PEFR) and waist circumference in healthy adolescence and analyze if waist circumference is a convenient substitute for BMI

Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted at high schools. Hundred children (%) females and 50 males) between 12 and 15 years were enrolled in the study. After taking detailed history they underwent a complete clinical evaluation. Their weight (in kgs), height in (cms), hip circumference (in cms) waist circumference (in cms) were recorded. The children lung function was assessed by W rights **peak** flow meter.

Conclusion: The study showed that there was a reciprocal relationship between the waist circumference and **peak** expiratory flow rate and also between BMI and PEFR. Waist circumference is a convenient index for assessing obesity.

Methods:The above study was carried out on 60 females in the age group of 17-20 years without any history of any major psychiatric illnesses, known metabolic diseases or consumption of any drugs or hearing defects. The haemoglobin of the above participants was measured using the Cyanmeth-hemoglobin method. The criteria for anemia was considered <12gm%. The Cognition of the above participants was checked using the Evoked potential Machine- from Recorders and Medicare systems.In which the P300 wave (positive wave that **peak**s at 250-600msec) was evaluated using the auditory response to `odd ball paradigm'.

Objectives: To compare blood volume estimations using trivalent chromium[51Cr (III)] and standard Evans blue (EB) method in New Zealand white rabbit models and establish correction factor (**CF**).

Methods: Blood volume estimation in 33 rabbits done using EB dye method and concentration determined using spectrophotometric assay followed by blood volume estimation using direct injection of 51Cr (III). 20 out of 33 rabbits were used to find **CF**by dividing blood volume estimation using EB with blood volume estimation using 51Cr (III). CF is validated in 13 rabbits by multiplying it with blood volume estimation values obtained using 51Cr (III).

Results: The mean circulating blood volume of 33 rabbits using EB dye was 142.02 +22.77 ml or 65.76 + 9.31 ml/ kg and using 51Cr (III) was estimated to be 195.66 +47.30 ml or 89.81 + 17.88 ml/kg.The **CF** was found to be 0.77. The mean blood volume of 13 rabbits measured using EB dye was 139.54 + 27.19 ml or 66.33 + 8.26 ml/kg and using 51Cr (III) with CF was 152.73+46.25 ml or 71.87+ 13.81 ml/kg(p = 0.110).

Conclusions: The estimation of blood volume using 51Cr (III)was comparable to standard EB method using **CF**. With further research in this direction we envisagehuman blood volume estimation using 51Cr (III) to find its application in acute clinical settings.

Aim: Cardia**cf**unction is influenced by gender & gonadal steroids. Ventricular arrhythmias are more common in women and seem to exhibit during the menstrual cycle. JT interval is major component of QT intervals. It measures ventricular repolarization. According to literature, estrogen lengthens the JT interval. Hormonal changes during menstrual cycle may cause changes in ECG intervals.

Methodology: BAER and VEP were recorded by using Neuroperfect EMG 2000 system with installed software during follicular (8 ­ 14) & luteal phases (17-23) of the same menstrual cycle. In BAER, absolute latencies of waves I, III &V and inter**peak** latencies of waves I ­V, I ­ III & III ­ V were recorded . In pattern reversal VEP, peak P100, N75 and N145 latencies were recorded.

Results: Statistical analysis were done by using Unpaired`t'test. There were increase in absolute latencies and inter **peak** latencies of BAER in the follicular phase compared to the luteal phase, and it was statistically significant (p<0.05). Likewise, latencies of N75, P100 waves of VEP were significantly prolonged (p<0.05) in follicular phase. Discussion: The increased wave latencies during follicular phase may be due to elevated levels of Estrogen, which is said to enhance the release of neurotransmitter GABA which slows down the synaptic conduction time. The decreased wave latency in the luteal phase may be due to thermogenic and antagonistic action of progesterone.

(2) Respiratory rate (3) Respiratory Minute volume (4) Vital capacity (5) **Peak** expiratory flow rate and (6) Breath holding time (at the end of deep inspiration). Three reading of each parameter (except respiratory rate) were taken and the best of the three readings were recorded. Then the readings were converted to BTPS by multiplying

It was observed that after deep breathing of 2 minutes all the above lung function parameters were increased. However increase was not statistically significant. After deep breathing for 5 minutes there was significant increase in vital capacity, **peak** expiratory flow rate and breath holding time , while there was non-significant increase in tidal volume and respiratory rate. Thus we can conclude that deep breathing improved lung function parameters.

Results: The **peak** heart rate increased significantly in patients of MSA-P as a response to the cold pressor test (5.757 ± 0.7760 bpm, p < 0.0001) but there was no change in the PTT (0.1292 ms ± 2.67, p=0.859).

Subjects and methods: Pulse wave transmitral Doppler echocardiographic data was assessed in 100 subjects. Of which, 50 were normotensives (systolic <120 mmHg and diastolic <80 mmHg) and 50 were pre-hypertensives (systolic = 120­139 mmHg and diastolic= 80­89 mmHg) .Their early and late diastolic **peak** transmitral flow velocity ratio (E/A ratio) and deceleration time (E wave deceleration time) were measured.Un-paired student's t-test was used for statistical analysis.

Objectives: Study of FVC (Forced Vital Capacity), FEV1 (Forced Expiratory Volume at 1Second), PEFR **(Peak** Expiratory Flow Rate) in petrol pump workers according to their duration of exposure ( 1to 5 year and more than 5 year).

Results: In comparison with non-pregnant participants, pregnant women had significantly lower mean [p= 0.04] and central systolic blodd pressure [p=0.02], central pulse pressure[p=0.02] and augmentation index[p=0.02]. Similarly, the carotid femoral pulse wave velocity[**cf**PWV], ankl brachial index[ABI] and arterial stiffness were significantly higher in pregnant women than in healthy non-pregnant controls[p=0.001, 0.001, 0.006] respectively.

Material & Method: 600 cotton mill workers from Sangola, District Solapur, Maharashtra state were taken as subjects. Their FVC, FEV1 &PEFR was recorded by Benedict Roth's Spirometer & **peak** flow expirometer respectively. The workers were divided into 5 groups as per their department. Subgroups were formed according to the number of years of service in each department.

Keywords-FVC(Forced Vital Capacity), PEFR **(Peak** Expiratory Flow Rate), FEV1 (Forced Vital Capacity during 1st second)

A comparative study of **peak** oxygen consumption in smokers and non smokers.

study smokers showed significant reduction in **peak** oxygen consumption (VO2max) compared to non smokers. The decreased VO2max is due to the CO-saturation of the blood.

Keywords: **Peak** oxygen consumption, VO2max, Cardiorespiratory fitness, QCT Corresponding address: Dr. Vivek.P, Department of Physiology,Sri Siddhartha Medical College, Tumkur, Karnataka. Email :vivek_p07@yahoo.co.in

Circadian rhythm of **Peak** Expiratory Flow Rate (PEFR) in healthy young adults.

Methods: The PEFR was measured with Wright's portable **peak** flow meter at 7:00, 12:00, 17:00, 21:00, 01:00 hours in 140 healthy male subjects. The PEFR was measured at 07:00 A.M only in 93 healthy female subjects. The diurnal variation of PEFR was studied only in male subjects.



# Title: A pharmacological model of cerebral ischemia. The effects of indomethacin on cerebral blood flow velocity, quantitative EEG and cognitive functions.
**Author:** Hemler, R J and Hoogeveen, J H and Kraaier, V and Van Huffelen, A C and Wieneke, G H and Hijman, R and Glerum, J H
**Year:** 1990
**Filename:** 
**Keywords count:** -2



# Title: Influence of hyperbaric heliox environment at 31ATA on microvibration and electroencephalogram in four divers
**Author:** Sakamoto, K and Usui, T and Yamasaki, M and Masuya, Y and Seki, K and Nakayama, H
**Year:** 1985
**Filename:** files/4383/Sakamoto et al. - 1985 - Influence of hyperbaric heliox environment at 31AT.pdf
**Keywords count:** -1



# Title: Visual reaction time and the human alpha rhythm: The effects of stimulus luminance, area, and duration
**Author:** Robinson, Daniel N.
**Year:** 1966
**Filename:** files/294/1966-02503-001.pdf
**Keywords count:** 0



# Title: EEG source imaging during two Qigong meditations
**Author:** Faber, Pascal L and Lehmann, Dietrich and Tei, S and Tsujiuchi, T and Kumano, H and Pascual-Marqui, R D and Kochi, K and Pascal, L and Roberto, D and Faber, Pascal L and Lehmann, Dietrich
**Year:** 2012
**Filename:** files/3671/Faber-2012-EEG source imaging during two Qigon.pdf
**Keywords count:** 2

Lagopoulos J, Xu J, Rasmussen I, Vik A, Malhi GS, Eliassen **CF**, Arntsen IE, Saether JG, Hollup S, Holen A, Davanger S, Ellingsen Ø (2009) Increased theta and alpha EEG activity during nondirective meditation. J Altern Complem Med 15(11):1187­1192

Lavallee **CF**, Hunter MD, Persinger MA (2011) Intracerebral source generators characterizing concentrative meditation. Cogn Process 12(2):141­150



# Title: Individual brain-frequency responses to self-selected music
**Author:** Höller, Y and Thomschewski, A and Schmid, E V and Höller, P and Crone, J S and Trinka, E and Holler, Y and Thomschewski, A and Schmid, E V and Holler, P and Crone, J S and Trinka, E and Höller, Y and Thomschewski, A and Schmid, E V and Höller, P and Crone, J S and Trinka, E
**Year:** 2012
**Filename:** files/3709/1-s2.0-S0167876012005909-main.pdf
**Keywords count:** 3

In psychophysiology the alpha**-peak** frequency is often discussed as an important factor. Kabuto et al. (1993) examined EEG-power changes in response to relaxing music. They found that the alpha-peak frequency correlates negatively with a decrease of an extracted score in the left occipital region which is related to calmness. Moreover, the authors found that the relaxation effect of pleasant music was associated with the change in the total theta power. This effect varied with personality traits. Itis possible that the interindividual variances are due to stress-related traits and are reflected by individual patterns of the EEG power spectrum, i.e. the baseline. Furthermore, we argue that the reactivity of frequency bands shows interindividual variance. It is known that even for very simple stimuli the reactivity of alpha activity varies between subjects. In an oddball task we found decreases and increases of alpha activity in a sample of healthy subjects (Höller et al., 2011a). A high variability was also found for subject's own name (Höller et al., 2011b; Kotchoubey et al., 2004). Thus, the individual responses can be an increase or a decrease even if the stimulus is very simple. Most studies on effects in the alpha range used group-level statistics and found decreases, that is, desynchronization of power in response to stimuli. We found an alpha desynchronization followed by an alpha synchronization in most subjects and some subjects with desynchronization or synchronization, only.It could be possible that the samples of most experiments contained more subjects who reacted with a desynchronization of alpha power in the examined frequency range. In such a case, one would find an alpha desynchronization as a

This list of possible sources of variance is not exhaustive. It is obvious that with so many sources of variance it is impossible to record universal patterns of response even if the same piece of music is used for every subject. To really disentangle the various moderating factors of brain responses to music a larger sample of subjects would be needed, being well balanced in gender, musical education, and alpha **peak** frequency. In addition, the individual listening modes and experienced emotions during listening to music should be considered.



# Title: Effect of the cholinesterase inhibiting substance galanthamine on human EEG and visual evoked potentials.
**Author:** Holl, G and Straschill, M and Thomsen, T and Fischer, J P and Kewitz, H
**Year:** 1992
**Filename:** files/4403/Holl et al. - 1992 - Effect of the cholinesterase inhibiting substance .pdf
**Keywords count:** 22

Summary The action of galanthamine (GAL), a cholinesterase inhibiting substance, on resting EEG and on flash visual evoked potentials (VEPs) was tested in 9 healthy subjects. Alpha power was increased significantlyin 4 of 8 subjects after the infusion of 10 mg, which provided a median inhibition of 47% of acetylcholinesterasein erythrocytes.**Mean alpha frequenc**y and **peak** alpha frequency decreased significantlyin 5 of the 8 subjects by 0.22-0.98 Hz. Alpha power increase and alpha frequency decrease were not accompanied by changes in theta power.

In the average spectrum Sa and in each of the 10 spectra S~e 3 parameters were calculated for each frequency band: (1) the total power P = ]ES(f) (f is the frequency, S(f) is the power spectrum; summation is performed within the band limits); (2) the **mean frequenc**y

(3) the **peak** frequency fp. Changes of P, fm and fp were used to quantify the effect of GAL infusion on the EEG. The differences zIP, Afm and zIfp in Table I were calculated from the parameters of the two spectra Sa of the pretest EEG and the test EEG. Significance of parameter change was tested with a t test, comparing the parameters from the 10 spectra Sae of the pretest EEG with those of the test EEG.

lator strobotest LT 1001, Knott Elektronik, F.R.G.). With an intensity setting of II, an energy of 0.37 Joule/flash was obtained. Stimuli were applied binocularly with full-field stimulation. The distance between the lamp and the subject's eyes was 50 cm. Stimuli were presented with the eyes closed. Flash repetition rate was 1.5/sec. The evoked responses were recorded from right occipital electrode 0 2 with midfrontai Fz as reference. Amplifier bandpass was 2-1000 Hz. Signals were digitized at 2000 samples/sec. Sampling period was 500 msec. Each averaged response consisted of 100 sweeps. Labelling of **peak**s and quantification of rhyth-

(I) Effect of GAL on spontaneous EEG All subjects had a **dominant alpha rhythm** and only

small beta, theta and delta components. The delta portion of the spectrum, which is likely to contain artifacts, was not considered for evaluation. In the beta and theta band only power changes were taken into consideration because no stable frequency **peak**s could be found in most cases. Power spectra of pretest and test EEGs in the frequency range from 4 Hz to 18 Hz are displayed in Fig. 3; quantitative results are given in Table I.

EEG. Power and frequency parameters are obtained from the pairs of average spectra displayed in Fig. 3 (average spectra from 6 electrodes O1, 0 2 , P3, P4, T5, T6; averages of 10 epochs of 5 sec duration). To test significance of parameter changes we calculated the parameters for each 5 sec epoch separately and used a t test (10 epochs of pretest EEG versus 10 epochs of test EEG; P = 0.05). Ap: change of power in the specified frequency band. Jfp: change of **peak** frequency. Afro: change of **mean frequenc**y, fo and fm are estimated within the frequency limits of the alpha band. In subject A significance of Afv is tested separately for the lower frequency peak P1 and for the second peak P2. In subject H Af o is not specified (2 peaks in the pretest EEG but only 1 peak in the test EEG).

Fig. 2. Rhythmic afterdiseharge of flash evoked visual potentials. Control responses of 2 subjects. Three averaged responses of 1 subject are superimposed on each trace. Wave VII, as defined by Cigfinek (1961). The consecutive waves of the afterdischarge are accordingly labelled IX and XI. **Peak**-to**-peak** amplitudes of waves VII, IX and XI were measured from each negative peak to following positivity. Strength of afterdischarge is expressed as the sum of these amplitudes (AS). Mean and standard deviations of peak latencies (msec) of waves VII, IX and XI (control values from 9 subjects): VII:

**mean frequenc**y fm and **peak** frequency fp of the alpha rhythm decreased significantly by 0.22-0.98 Hz in 5 of 8 subjects tested (Table I). Increase of the dose to 20-35 mg caused a further decrease in all the 3 subjects tested.

activity or EEG desynchronization after cholinomimetics in humans (Grob et al. 1947; Pfeiffer et al. 1963; Goldstein and Beck 1965). Physostigmine infusion caused a time-dependent induction of REM sleep and arousal during normal human sleep, transforming synchronized brain states into desynchronized ones (Sitaram et al. 1977). The only comparable study on humans, which assessed the EEG effects of physostigmine by computerized EEG spectral analysis, reported an increase of alpha power after 0.5 mg physostigmine (Pfefferbaum et al. 1979). Higher doses of physostigmine (1.25 rag, 2.5 rag) had no effect on the alpha power but resulted in a decrease of **peak** and **mean alpha frequenc**y with a concomitant increase in the amount of slow activity (delta and theta). The decrease of alpha frequency was therefore interpreted as a component of a generalized, possibly unspecific, slowing of brain activity (Pfefferbaum et al. 1979). In our experiments the decrease of peak and mean alpha frequency was dose related but not associated with toxic side effects and without a concomitant increase of theta and delta power. It is therefore not the expression of a generalized slowing of brain activity, but reflects a specific action of GAL on the generator mechanism of the alpha rhythm.



# Title: Ketamine, an NMDA-antagonist, increases the oscillatory frequencies of α-peaks on the electroencephalographic power spectrum
**Author:** Tsuda, N and Hayashi, K and Hagihira, S and Sawa, T
**Year:** 2007
**Filename:** files/2565/Tsuda-2007-Ketamine, an NMDA-antagonist, incre.pdf
**Keywords count:** 36

Ketamine, an NMDA-antagonist, increases the oscillatory frequencies of a**-peak**s on the electroencephalographic power spectrum

Results: Propofol alone caused the a-**peak**s of the power spectra to occur at an average frequency of 10.4 Æ 0.9 Hz; the addition of ketamine shifted the peaks to higher frequencies of 15.1 Æ 1.4 Hz (P < 0.05). On the other hand, when the EEG was activated by discontinuation of propofol, the corresponding a**-peak**s disappeared. Conclusions: Ketamine increased the frequencies of a-spindle waves induced by propofol, but did not block their formations. The phenomena have the possibility to underlie the cooperative effect between propofol and ketamine concerning sedation and anesthesia.

While non-linear thalamic contributions to the spindle activity are reflected only by phase analysis of wave synchronization, the synchronous neural oscillations of the spindle waves, with increases or decreases in amplitude as a result of the number of active neurons firing in synchrony, can be detected by synchronous **peak**s at a frequency area on the power spectral analysis (15). Precise examination of the effects of anesthetics on the spindle peaks of the power spectra, as well as phase analysis, may therefore be necessary to help determine the sedative mechanism of anesthetics.

Although there have already been some reports on the combined effects of ketamine and a GABAA agonist on the raw EEG and more complex EEGderived indices, many of them missed the detail reports about a spindle waves. In the present study, we examined the effects of an NMDA-antagonist on a**-peak**s of the EEG power spectra with concurrent administration of a GABAA-agonist using TCI technology, and thus were able to determine the backgrounds of the sedative interaction of an NMDAantagonist and a GABAA-agonist through the spindle

Fig. 1. The protocol followed in all patients of both groups. Measurements of electroencephalogram (EEG) indices and power spectral analysis were performed at two time points, baseline (Base_P) and emergence (Eme_P), in Group P, and at two time points, baseline (Base_PK) and 15 min after ketamine injection (Keta_PK), in Group PK. Change in spindle **peak**s was examined using spectral analysis at four time points (Baseline: Base_PK, 15 min: Keta_PK, 30 min, 45 min after ketamine injection) in Group PK.

An ASPECT A-2000 monitor was used to collect EEG data. A BIS sensor (EEG-electrodes, Aspect medical systems), consisting of three electrodes, was applied to the forehead, with the recording lead at Fp1-A1 and the reference at Fpz. The A-2000 checked electrode impedance every 10 min, and the impedance was maintained at 5 kV or less throughout the study. All binary data packets, containing raw EEG wave signals (converted from analog to digital in 128 Hz frequency) as well as BIS and other processed parameters, were recorded via an RS232 interface on a personal computer (**CF**02; Panasonic, Osaka, Japan) using the Bispectrum Analyzer BIS A-2000 version (BSA Ver3.22B2) developed with Cþþ Builder Ver5.0 (Borland, Tokyo, Japan) by us (17­19). We used artifact flags obtained from the A-2000 BIS monitor, and excluded epochs containing artifacts. Furthermore, we rejected epochs containing signals over 200 mV in amplitude, for the removal of the EEG packets including noise induced by electrocautery. We calculated the signal quality index (SQI) as the ratio of the number of epochs used for calculation to

the total number of epochs, and adopted only the values obtained from periods with SQI > 0.8. The low-pass filter was set at 50Hz, and we used subtraction of the moving average to cut signals below 0.5 Hz. BIS values were calculated by the A-2000 from the preceding 1-min period of EEG recording (more precisely, 61.5 s), and were extracted to a personal computer directly from the A-2000. EEG parameter, spectral edge frequency (SEF95), was calculated from the averaged power spectrum over 1 min by us, which were made from 2-s epochs (overlapped by 75%) after applying Blackman's window (15, 20). AMP, defined as the voltage halfway between the positive **peak** and negative peak, was calculated from waves with amplitudes of more than 5 mV, and averaged over 1 min. For detailed analysis at the indicated points in both groups, the averaged power spectra thus calculated were recorded from 0.5Hz to 47.0Hz at 0.5-Hz intervals, and were converted to a normalized form, i.e. the ratio of the individual power to total power within the frequency range from 0.5Hz to 47.0Hz at 0.5-Hz intervals. Normalized power spectra were then divided into six frequency ranges: d-area (0.5­3.5 Hz), u-area (4­7.5 Hz), a-area (8­12.5 Hz), b1-area (13­17.5 Hz), b2-area (18­30Hz) and g-area (30.5­47 Hz). Then, the sum of normalized power in each frequency range was calculated.

For the comparison of the EEG parameters (Tables 2 and 3), Mann­Whitney's U-test was used between Groups PK and P, and Wilcoxon's signed-ranks test was used within the same group. Demographic data between Groups P and PK were analysed using the unpaired t-test (Welch's t-test). The hemodynamic parameters over time, and the shifts of mean spindle **peak**s before and after injections of ketamine (Fig. 5), within the same groups, were analysed using the paired t-test, because the distributions were regarded as the normality assumption using the Shapiro­Wilk normality test. Findings of P < 0.05 were considered significant. The statistical comparisons were analysed using Statview version II (SAS, Cary, NC).

Figures 2 and 3 show raw EEG data and the corresponding power spectra, respectively, before and 15 min after injection of ketamine in a representative case in Group PK (A: Base_PK, B: Keta_PK) and after discontinuation of administration of propofol in Group P without administration of ketamine (C: Eme P). We found a remarkable shift of the **peak** in the a-range to a higher frequency with administration of ketamine (shown by arrows in Fig. 3), but disappearance of the peak in the emergence phase.

Figure 4 shows the average normalized power spectra during propofol-TCI in both groups (A: Base_P & PK, n ¼ 17), 15 min after injection of ketamine (B: Keta_PK, n ¼ 9), and after interruption of propofol injection (C: Eme_P, n ¼ 8), respectively. Administration of ketamine shifted the power spectrum of the EEG under propofol anesthesia to a higher frequency, resulting in **peak**s at about 15 Hz, instead of spindle peaks at 10 Hz. On the other hand, discontinuation of propofol increased relative power in the higher frequency range (above 30 Hz, g-range), but did not induce compensatory a**-peak**s.

The mean **peak** frequencies at four time points before and after injection of ketamine (baseline, and 15, 30, and 45 min after injection of ketamine) in Group PK are shown in Fig. 5. With propofol alone,

the **peak** of the spindle waves was in the a-range, with an average of 10.4 Æ 0.9 Hz (baseline: Base_PK). Approximately 15 min after ketamine was injected intravenously, the peak shifted to 15.1 Æ 1.4 Hz

Fig. 3. Representative changes in power spectrum before and after injection of ketamine and after interruption of propofol-TCI. White arrows indicate spindle **peak**s. (A) During propofol-TCI anaesthesia, sleep spindles of around 10 Hz become predominant on the electroencephalogram (EEG) (Base_PK). (B) Approximately 15 min after injection of ketamine during propofol-TCI, a marked shift of the peak in the a-range to a higher frequency is noted (Keta_PK). (C) Process of emergence after discontinuation of propofol. Disappearance of the peak in the awakening phase is noted (Eme_P).

(Keta_PK. P < 0.05). The largest shift occurred approximately 15 min after ketamine injection, but the **peak** subsequently gradually returned towards the pre-ketamine level (Fig. 5). The shifts in the peaks were significant for each pair of 15-min intervals. This peak shifting occurred consistently in all patients, as reflected by stable and small coefficients of variation (CV) compared with baseline, especially at

Although it is known that ketamine increases bactivity, the detailed pattern of this increased bactivity in the power spectrum has not yet been clarified. The present study showed for the first time that NMDA receptor antagonism with ketamine during coexisting administration of a GABAA-agonist, propofol, resulted in the shift of the a**-peak**s to the frequencies approximately 5 Hz higher, from the a area to the b1 area of the power spectra. It suggests that b-activity increased because of the increases in the frequencies constituting the a waves by approximately 5 Hz. The nature of neural synchronization is commonly associated with two processes: the first process is related to changes in the amplitude of

Fig. 5. The mean **peak** frequencies at four time points before and after injection of ketamine (baseline: before injection of ketamine, 15, 30, 45: at 15 min, 30 min and 45 min after injections of ketamine) in Group PK are shown. Coefficients of variation (CV% ¼ 100*SD/ mean) are indicated for each point. Each different symbol in the figure means the individual data of the person employed in the study (n ¼ 9). *A statistically significant difference was found between the measuring pairs between 15-min intervals (P < 0.05).

neural oscillations, with increases or decreases in amplitude depending on the number of active neurons firing in synchrony (15), which, in turn, can be detected by synchronous high **peak**s on power spectral analysis; the other process of neural synchronization involves phase synchronization, which is a manifestation of the non-linear nature of neural activity. Therefore, the synchronous neural activity of a spindle waves appears in the a**-peak**s on the power spectrum as well as in phase analysis. These results, that ketamine induced the shift of the a-peaks to higher frequencies, and that the relative powers of the shifted peaks were the same as those of the a-

**peak**s, are particularly notable, because these findings have the possibility to suggest that a spindle rhythm may be modulated by an NMDA-antagonist. Moreover, returns of the shifted peaks over time towards baselines were also observed, suggesting the reproducibility of these phenomena.

Conversely, although ketamine shifted the a**-peak**s to the b-band, the a-peaks disappeared in the emergence phase. Hence, our study showed that addition of ketamine to propofol affected the oscillatory features of a-waves by a mechanism other than withdrawal of anesthetics, although suppression of the EEG by propofol is in a sense competed with ketamine. Although our results could not directly explain the neuro­physiological interaction between NMDA and GABAA mechanisms on a-spindles, we have a possible hypothesis that ketamine modulates the GABAA subcortical system. Because the rhythmic spindle frequency (7­14 Hz) initiated in RE neurons is determined with the duration of the hyperpolarization in the TC cells, and because the alterations of wide variety of ionic currents with different voltage dependencies and kinetics of activation/ inactivation with different inhibitory time constants contribute to the duration of hyper-polarization (11­ 13, 25­29), thus minor alterations of these membrane potential in RE and TC induced by ketamine have the possibility to well account for the change of the spindle frequency. However, it is one of our possible speculations. Further study is needed to clarify the interaction between NMDA and GABAA mechanisms, as spindle oscillations progressively develop as a consequence of membrane potential changes in TC and RE thalamic cells (25­29), and linking neurosystems can interfere with membrane resting potential through this integrated complex network. Finally, if ketamine increases the frequencies of aspindle waves without blocking their formations, the



# Title: EEG peak alpha frequency as an indicator for physical fatigue
**Author:** Ng, S C and Raveendran, P
**Year:** 2007
**Filename:** files/4496/Ng and Raveendran - 2007 - EEG peak alpha frequency as an indicator for physi.pdf
**Keywords count:** 49

EEG **Peak** Alpha Frequency as an Indicator for Physical Fatigue

Abstract-- The **peak** alpha frequency (**PAF**) has been associated with mental abilities. In this study, we use the EEG to investigate the relationship between PAF and physical fatigue. Eight right handed male subjects (age from 23 to 29) volunteered for the experiment. They have to perform a hand grip task for 30 seconds with each hand for 30 times or until they could not continue anymore. Electrodes are placed at 55 locations all over the scalp to detect EEG. Three electrodes are placed around the eyes region to detect EOG. The EEG signals of six subjects clearly indicated a reduction in the PAF around the motor cortex region after the physical exertion. Thus, this study shows that the reduction of PAF can be an indicator of physical fatigue.

Keywords-- **peak** alpha frequency, muscle fatigue.

reduction in the muscle ability to carry out the task and thus indicate fatigue. When a muscle is fatigued, lactic acid and carbon dioxide increase and the muscular tissue becomes acidic [2]. In the frequency domain, the **peak** frequency will shift to a lower value when fatigue sets in due to the lowering of pH in the muscle [13].

II. **PEAK** ALPHA FREQUENCY

Earlier studies have shown that, **peak** alpha frequency (**PAF**) in the EEG increased from an infant to an adult and then started declining with age [18]. Marshall et al. [19] found the existence of the maximum relative power at the central region during toddlerhood and postulated that it may be indicative of intense development of locomotor ability. Stroganova et al. [20] found the PAF increased from 6.24 ± 0.45 Hz at 8 months to 6.78 ± 0.38 Hz at 11 months. Based on the sample of 550 subjects acquired from a total of 6 laboratories (2 laboratories from USA, Europe and Australia each), Clark et al. [21] found that PAF of adults reduced with age more prominently at the anterior compared to the posterior brain region. From the studies of Kopruner et al. [22], there seemed to be a linear relationship between age and PAF of adult subjects (PAF=11.95-0.053 x age).

Various studies have shown **PAF** related to response time [23] and memory performance [21,24,25]. Klimesch et al.

[23] shows a higher **PAF** for subjects with faster response time. PAF of subjects with good memory is about 1 Hz higher than that of similar age subjects with bad memory [21,24,25]. Angelakis et al. [26] proposed PAF as an indicator for cognitive preparedness (the capacity of the brain to execute complex task). They found that subjects with traumatic brain injury having lower PAF than normal subjects during resting with eyes open after a working memory task.

Based on the review, physical fatigue would result in changes at the peripheral as well as the central level. A higher **peak** alpha frequency is indicative of a higher mental ability (Stated in Klimesch [25] and Angelakis et al. [26]). Studies by Liu et al. [16,17] indicate that muscle fatigue affects the EEG signals. In the present study, it is suggested that the peak alpha frequency, **PAF** would reduce when physical fatigues sets in.

EEG **Peak** Alpha Frequency as an Indicator for Physical Fatigue

B. Quantifying **Peak** Alpha Frequency

In his review of alpha and theta oscillations, Klimesch [25] proposed two methods to find the **peak** alpha frequency. The first method is to look for the distinct peak within the alpha frequency range. The second method finds the center of gravity within the alpha frequency range. He suggested using the center of gravity method particularly if there are multiple peaks in the alpha range. In 2005, Neuper et al. [28] tested both methods of finding peak alpha frequency and found that the center of gravity method gave more stable results. Thus, the center of gravity method of finding peak alpha frequency will be applied here.

In the current study, only the eyes closed data before and after the experiment will be processed. First, each of the eyes closed and eyes opened data that has been EOG removed is remontage using the Common Average Reference method. Then, it is segmented into 10-second intervals (to give frequency resolution of 0.1 Hz) with one second step size. Each ten second segment would be windowed using a Gaussian window to reduce spectral leakage. Then the signal is transformed into the frequency domain using Fourier Transform. The **peak** alpha frequency for that segment is determined using the center of gravity method assuming the range of 7-14 Hz as the alpha frequency band. The equation to find the peak alpha frequency is similar to the one used by Klimesch [25] and is given in equation (3)

**PAF** = (af x f)/ af

The **peak** alpha frequency for each location will be determined individually. Then, for each segment of eyes closed data the mean for each individual location is found.

In order to compare the effects of fatigue on to the **peak** alpha frequency (**PAF**), the PAF of each location before the experiment is subtracted from the corresponding location after the experiment.

From Fig. 2, it can be seen that the **PAF** at the motor cortex regions corresponding with the left and right hand have been reduced more significantly after the experiment as compared to the other region of the brain. This may be an indication that the mental control over the left and right hand have been reduced due to fatigue.

Based on Table 1, six out of the eight subjects have distinctive reduction of **PAF** around the motor cortex region (similar to the topographical plot of Fig. 2). Two subjects (S4 and S7) have no change in the PAF. It is interesting to note that these two subjects skipped their lunch before the experiment.

Fig. 2 Differences of **PAF** before and after experiment.

Table 1 The **peak** alpha frequency before and after experiment

It can also be seen that the most reactive location to fatigue is located around the motor cortex region. It is usually at the C3 (or C4) location or their adjacent location (which is the motor cortex region for the control of hand). For the subjects that indicate a reduction in the **PAF**, the frequency reduction is around 0.4 Hz at the left brain region while it is about 0.6 Hz at the right brain region. This may be indicating that the same load perform by both hands resulted in a higher fatigue level at the left hand (contralateral to the right region) since all the subjects are right handed.

In this experimental study, eight subjects were subjected to hand grip task for 30 seconds with each hand for 30 times or until they could not continue anymore. The study found six of the subjects' **peak** alpha frequency reduced. Two of the subjects skipped their lunch and quit after a few trials, which were not sufficient enough to indicate any change in **PAF**. The PAF reduction is most prominent at the motor cortex region associated with hand control.

13. Brody L., Pollock M., Roy SH, De Luca CJ, Celli B. (1991) pH induced effects on **median frequenc**y and conduction velocity on the myoelectric signal. J. Appl. Phys., 71:1878­1885

21. Clark CR, Veltmeyer MD, Hamilton RJ, Simms E, Paul R, Hermens D, Gordon E. (2004) Spontaneous alpha **peak** frequency predicts working memory performance across the age span. Int J of Psychophysiology 53:1­9

26. Angelakis E, Lubar JF, Stathopoulou S, Kounios J. (2004) **Peak** alpha frequency: an electroencephalographic measure of cognitive preparedness. Clin Neurophysiol 115:887­897



# Title: Pain assessment by continuous EEG: Association between subjective perception of tonic pain and peak frequency of alpha oscillations during stimulation and at rest
**Author:** Nir, Rony Reuven and Sinai, Alon and Raz, Einat and Sprecher, Elliot and Yarnitsky, David
**Year:** 2010
**Filename:** files/4516/Nir et al. - 2010 - Pain assessment by continuous EEG Association bet.pdf
**Keywords count:** 103

Pain assessment by continuous EEG: Association between subjective perception of tonic pain and **peak** frequency of alpha oscillations during stimulation and at rest

Keywords: Tonic pain Psychophysics Electroencephalography (EEG) Alpha oscillations **Peak** frequency

Recordings of neurophysiological brain responses to noxious stimuli have been traditionally based on short stimuli, in the order of milliseconds, which induce distinct event-related potentials (ERPs). However, using such stimuli in the experimental setting is disadvantageous as they are too brief to faithfully simulate clinical pain. We aimed at utilizing continuous EEG to investigate the properties of **peak** alpha frequency (**PAF**) as an objective cortical measure associated with subjective perception of tonic pain. Five minute long continuous EEG was recorded in 18 healthy volunteers under: (i) resting-state; (ii) innocuous temperature; and (iii) psychophysically-anchored noxious temperature. Numerical pain scores (NPSs) collected during the application of tonic noxious stimuli were tested for correlation with peak frequencies of alpha power-curves derived from central, temporal and frontal electrodes. NPSs and PAFs remained stable throughout the recording conditions (RM-ANOVAs; Ps > 0.51). In the noxious condition, PAFs obtained at the bilateral temporal scalp were correlated with NPSs (Ps < 0.001). Moreover, resting-state PAFs recorded at the bilateral temporal scalp were correlated with NPSs reported during the noxious condition (Ps < 0.01). These psychophysical-neurophysiological relations attest to the properties of PAF as a novel cortical objective measure of subjective perception of tonic pain. Moreover, resting-state PAFs might hold inherent pain modulation attributes, possibly enabling the prediction of individual responsiveness to prolonged pain. The relevance of PAF to the neural processing of tonic pain may indicate its potential to advance pain research as well as clinical pain characterization.

Continuous EEG is commonly analyzed by transforming data from the time domain to the frequency domain. The transformed data is characterized by a curve of the amplitude of power­ density plotted against the frequency range of interest. The area under this curve is the frequency content of the observed activity. A significant measure derived from such analysis is the highest power­density point within the investigated frequency range. This **peak**-point is identified by two parameters: (i) the frequency at which it occurs on the frequency axis, and (ii) its amplitude on the power­density axis.

Within the frequency domain, alpha-band oscillations (7.5­ 12 Hz) are the most explored frequencies. These oscillations are widely distributed in the cerebral cortex, and their **peak** amplitude was found to decrease in the corresponding cortical regions during somatosensory stimuli and voluntary movements (Pfurtscheller and Lopes da Silva, 1999; Fu et al., 2001; Cheyne et al., 2003; Stancák et al., 2003; Feige et al., 2005). Similar decreases in alpha amplitudes were also reported to be induced by experimental pain (Chen and Rappelsberger, 1994; Chen et al., 1998; Chang et al., 2001a,b, 2002a,b; Ploner et al., 2006; Dowman et al., 2008). While alpha oscillations may conjointly represent cognitive performance, lower and higher frequencies have been associated with attentional processes and specific task requirements, respectively (Klimesch, 1999).

The measure of **peak** alpha frequency (**PAF**) has not yet been explored in the context of tonic pain processing. In other experimental paradigms, PAF has been described repeatedly as a stable measure (Poulos et al., 2002; Maltez et al., 2004; Vuga et al., 2006), increasing with cognitive processing, attentional demands and arousal (Köpruner et al., 1984; Klimesch et al., 1990; Li et al., 1996). A large study of 688 twins found PAF to be highly heritable (Posthuma et al., 2001), and the intra-individual stability of PAF was suggested to qualify this parameter as a `personal signature' due to its high reproducibility (Näpflin et al., 2007). Moreover, a study of 550 normal subjects aged 11­70 revealed that PAF was positively correlated with working memory performance across the lifespan (Clark et al., 2004).

These advantages of the **PAF** measure, which are lacking in the **peak** alpha amplitude, together with the novelty of associating PAF with processing of tonic pain, motivated us to focus on this measure. Specifically, the present study aimed at investigating whether PAF values induced by tonic noxious thermal stimuli

2.2. **PAF**s in the EEG recording conditions

An insignificant two-way RM-ANOVA for each recording condition indicated no significant differences between the three averaged **PAF**s attributed to each third of the recorded data at the examined electrodes (resting-state: P = 0.518; innocuous condition: P = 0.641; noxious condition: P = 0.708). These analyses attest to the stability of the PAF measure throughout the recording conditions and justify the averaging of the PAF values of the three epochs for further analysis. A significant two-way RM-ANOVA analysis (F12,340 = 6.577; P < 0.001) pointed to a statistical interaction among the factors Condition and Recording electrode location. A statistically significant change in PAFs between conditions (resting-state, innocuous and noxious) was indicated by the post-hoc Tukey­ Kramer test only at the temporal electrodes ipsilateral (P = 0.028) and contralateral (P = 0.015) to the applied stimulation, namely T7 and T8, respectively. At these electrode positions, mean PAF values increased from 9.19 ± 0.89 and 9.49 ±0.98 Hz under the resting-state condition, to 9.56 ± 0.81 and 9.93 ±0.87 Hz under the innocuous condition, and to 10.07 ± 1.05 and 10.49 ± 1.12 Hz under the noxious condition, respectively. Table 1 describes the linear associations between PAFs of the continuous EEG recorded at the Cz, C3, C4, T7, T8, Fp1 and Fp2 electrodes during the resting-state, innocuous, and noxious conditions (presented P-values are post Bonferroni corrections

Table 1 ­ Regression analyses of **peak** alpha frequencies (**PAF**s) in the EEG recording conditions. *P-values are Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons.

for multiple comparisons). The **PAF**s that were analyzed on the basis of the data recorded at the C4, T7 and T8 electrodes during the noxious condition were positively correlated with the NPSs induced by the noxious condition (Fig. 1A). PAFs derived from resting-state EEG recordings were correlated with the NPSs induced by the noxious condition at the C4, T7 and T8 electrodes (Fig. 1B). Fig. 1 portrays NPSs vs. PAF values only for the temporal electrodes since they solely demonstrated significant pain-induced changes in PAFs, as detailed in the aforementioned RM-ANOVA analysis incorporating Condition and Recording electrode location. Fig. 2 exemplifies increasing NPSs of tonic pain as well as the corresponding PAFs derived from the noxious and resting-state conditions.

In order to rule out the possibility that EEG changes were induced by intensity coding of the applied tonic noxious stimuli rather than by subjective perception of tonic pain, correlations between the individual `pain-60' temperatures were examined with NPSs and **PAF** values of the noxious condition. None of these tests yielded statistical significance (Table 2).

Fig. 1 ­ Regression analyses incorporating the NPSs of the noxious condition vs. **PAF**s of the noxious condition (A) and the resting-state condition (B) within the entire group (N = 18). T7: left temporal electrode (ipsilateral to stimulation); T8: right temporal electrode (contralateral to stimulation). NPS: numerical pain score; PAF: **peak** alpha frequency.

Fig. 2 ­ Mean NPSs (0­100 scale) to tonic noxious contact-heat stimuli, and **PAF**s derived from continuous EEG recorded at the temporal scalp contralateral to stimulation (T8 electrode) in 6 randomly chosen subjects under the noxious condition (solid line in grey fill) and at resting-state (dotted line in white fill). Subjective NPSs correlated with PAFs derived from the noxious condition (r = 0.747; P = 0.0004; N = 18) and the resting-state condition (r = 0.658; P = 0.003; N = 18); as the subjective NPSs of tonic pain increased, so did the PAFs derived from the noxious and resting-state conditions. Increased PAFs may be associated with the observed power loss in lower alpha oscillations and power gain in higher alpha oscillations following the change from resting-state to pain induction within an individual. NPS: numerical pain score; PAF: **peak** alpha frequency.

Table 2 ­ Regression analyses of `pain-60' temperatures vs. numerical pain scores (NPSs) and **peak** alpha frequencies (**PAF**s) of the noxious condition. *P-values of PAFs are Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons.

NPSs **PAF**s

The main finding of the current study is that **peak** alpha frequencies may represent an objective marker for subjective perception of tonic heat pain. This is based on the correlation between subjective pain scores and **PAF** values which were induced by tonic noxious heat stimuli. An additional observation was that inherent attributes of pain responsiveness may be indicated through electroencephalographic data obtained during stimulation-free conditions. This notion stems from the correlation between baseline PAFs recorded during resting-state and pain scores induced by the tonic noxious stimuli in a separate session. The lack of significant correlations between the individual `pain-60' temperatures and the NPSs as well as PAFs of the noxious condition substantiates that the EEG alterations were probably not due to the applied temperatures and their physiological intensity coding, but rather, due to the subjective experience of tonic pain.

We sought to demonstrate the associations of **PAF**, an objective neurophysiological parameter, with individual levels of experienced tonic pain, rather than with the physical intensity of the applied tonic stimuli. Thus, rather than employing physically-anchored intensities, we opted for the use of psychophysically-anchored intensities of the tonic noxious stimuli in accordance with the `pain-60' paradigm (Granot et al., 2006, 2008; Weissman-Fogel et al., 2009). The specific psychophysical `pain-60' level was chosen so as to preserve a steady pain perception throughout the tonic noxious stimuli, which was considered a prerequisite for utilizing the entire temporal span of the continuous EEG data for subsequent frequency content analyses. In our experience, this precondition is more likely to be met for the psychophysical level achieved using the `pain-60' intensity; stimuli of lower psychophysical intensities tend to decrease pain scores over the course of stimulation, probably owing to adaptation, whereas stimuli of higher intensities are inclined to increase pain ratings, possibly due to sensitization. As such, the pain scores obtained in the present study remained steady at tolerable but nevertheless significantly painful levels without changing during the prolonged application of the tonic noxious stimuli.

In healthy subjects, studies focusing on the relations between **PAF** and cognitive performance have demonstrated

**PAF** to be sensitive to various cognitive tasks, increasing with: visuospatial and arithmetic tasks (Osaka, 1984), administration of an auditory working memory task (Osaka et al., 1999), better verbal abilities (Anokhin and Vogel, 1996), higher speed and performance in a number of cognitive tasks (Li et al., 1996) and enhanced attentional demands and/or arousal (Klimesch, 1999). In that regard, as pain perception and arousal are intimately intertwined both functionally and physiologically and reciprocally affect one another (Rimm and Litvak, 1969; Groves and Thompson, 1970; Craig, 2006; Flor and Turk, 2006), it could stand to reason that an arousal effect may have been associated with the findings of the current study. In the clinical arena, Alzheimer's disease patients were reported to demonstrate reduced PAF (Klimesch et al., 1990; Passero et al., 1995), and in the case of chronic fatigue syndrome, decreased PAF was correlated with increased fatigue parameters (Billiot et al., 1997).

In keeping with these non-pain-related **PAF** reports, the current study suggests that higher PAFs are linearly correlated with increased perception of tonic heat pain. This finding implies that higher PAF characterizes a neural circuitry engaged in more extensive processing, which requires enhanced connectivity between affiliated brain regions (Chen et al., 1998; Posthuma et al., 2001; Mantini et al., 2009). A possible mechanism underlying the observed acceleration of PAF may be an increased activity of cortico-cortical and thalamocortical feedback loops, which may reflect excitatory processes (Klimesch, 1996, 1997). Specifically, this association between the psychophysical and neurophysiological dimensions of tonic pain is in line with the hypothesis that PAF indexes cognitive capacity related to the state of brain function (Angelakis et al., 2004), as exemplified by the findings that PAF was affected by emotional states (Kostyunina and Kulikov, 1995; Kostyunina, 1998), as well as the acute administration of various substances (Saletu et al., 1984; Knott, 1988; Tiffin et al., 1995; Lindgren et al., 1999). In this regard, we observed inter-correlations between PAF values across the resting-state, innocuous, and noxious conditions. These associations of PAF values in different states could suggest the possible existence of individual patterns of neuronal responses to varying exogenous stimuli. The correlations between PAF values and NPSs were observed at the bilateral temporal scalp, which is consistent with both painrelated activity in the primary somatosensory cortex and/or the somatosensory association areas located in the parietal operculum and/or insula (Dowman et al., 2008), and with tonic pain related reports in which changes in alpha-band amplitudes were detected at the same location (Chen and Rappelsberger, 1994; Le-Pera et al., 2000; Huber et al., 2006; Dowman et al., 2008).

emerging findings by demonstrating for the first time the relationship between **PAF**s of the resting-state condition and the NPSs of the tonic noxious stimulation. This finding suggests that the central processing of persistent noxious events within individuals can be indicated through the intrinsic neural functioning of their pain network at rest, possibly enabling the prediction of subjective tonic pain responsiveness without the use of external stimuli. An affiliated view proposes that `spontaneous' alpha oscillations do not necessarily reflect `passive states' or `idling' of the brain, but rather signals with quasi-deterministic properties relating to diverse brain functions, including sensory and memory processes (Baar et al., 1997). Likewise, PAF was suggested to index cognitive capacity related to the trait of brain function (Angelakis et al., 2004), as represented by the mentioned positive associations of PAF with both memory abilities and processing speed in healthy individuals, and by the chronically suppressed cognitive capacity of individuals with traumatic brain-injury induced decreased PAF (Angelakis et al., 2004).

The associations we observed between NPSs and **PAF**s were across the entire alpha spectrum. This may stem from the fact that the elements reflected by alpha sub-bands are affiliated, and so their associations with individual responses to exogenous stimuli may be comparable, specifically in the arena of pain research (Chen and Rappelsberger, 1994; Chang et al., 2001a; Chang et al., 2002a,b; Dowman et al., 2008). In keeping, previous studies investigated the attributes of the entire alpha span so as to characterize these oscillations collectively (Li et al., 1996; Baar et al., 2000, 2001; Suldo et al., 2001; Angelakis et al., 2004; Mu et al., 2008).

The applicability of the resting-state **PAF** measure to the pain-related clinical and research arenas is supported by the intra-individual stability of PAF at rest, which has repeatedly been demonstrated to show high reproducibility over periods of up to four years (Gasser et al., 1985; Dustman et al., 1999; Kondacs and Szabo, 1999; Poulos et al., 2002; Maltez et al., 2004; Vuga et al., 2006). Moreover, of the various EEG-derived frequency content parameters, the **peak** and **mean alpha frequenc**ies at rest were the most stable features measured at an interval of 3­4 months (Salinsky et al., 1991). In a large twins study with 688 participants, PAF was found to be highly heritable with 71­83% of the total variance reported to be genetic (Posthuma et al., 2001). These high heritability levels of PAF may be indicative of a stable inherent trait, which is influenced little by developmental plasticity or individual experiences and is instead explained largely by genetic factors. This trait may signify the evolutionary importance of PAF in the faster neural processing of both cognitive and physical stimuli.

Future research should concentrate on several limitations within the current study. First, as subjects were healthy young adults, further investigation is needed to expand the current findings to clinical pain populations and older adults. Second, we examined pain perception of tonic pain using thermal modality. Whether analogous findings as to tonic pain perception and its association with **PAF** will be observed using additional modalities calls for additional exploration. Finally, while the present study focuses on the alpha-band frequencies due to their aforementioned features, additional

In conclusion, current findings extend prior research regarding the characteristics of **PAF** as a direct, objective and experimentally stable measure of cognitive as well as sensory processes by reporting that increased PAF values derived from EEG recordings of resting-state and noxious conditions were correlated with higher NPSs. These results may have important implications for objectively and straightforwardly assessing pain responsiveness in pain research and clinical interventions.

4.4.2. EEG recording procedure Continuous 32-electrode EEG recording was performed during relaxed, but alert, wakefulness. Subjects were instructed to keep their eyes closed during EEG recording, as alpha **peak**s can occur at the frequency that is most depressed by opening of the eyes (Klimesch, 1999; Posthuma et al., 2001). The five-minute-long EEG recordings were conducted under three separate conditions: during the aforementioned two thermal stimulation intensities (innocuous 32 °C and noxious `pain-60' temperature) as well as throughout a baseline resting-state condition, during which no experimental stimulation was applied. Continuous EEG was always recorded first during the resting-state condition, followed by EEG recordings during the thermal stimuli, which were counter-balanced in order. Breaks of at least 20 min were maintained between the three recording conditions.

The EEG recordings at the electrodes positioned at Cz (central scalp), C3 (left central scalp, ipsilateral to stimulation), C4 (right central scalp, contralateral to stimulation), T7 (left temporal scalp, ipsilateral to stimulation), T8 (right temporal scalp, contralateral to stimulation), Fp1 (left frontal scalp, ipsilateral to stimulation), and Fp2 (right frontal scalp, contralateral to stimulation) were referenced to the midline chin electrode and incorporated in subsequent analyses (detailed hereunder). We focused on the aforementioned central, temporal and frontal electrodes due to ample evidence pointing at their particularly substantial relevance in research of tonic experimental pain (Backonja et al., 1991; Chen and Rappelsberger, 1994; Chen et al., 1998; Chang et al., 2001a,b, 2002a,b; Le-Pera et al., 2000; Huber et al., 2006; Dowman et al., 2008). Each EEG recording of 5 min was segmented into 300 segments of 1 s each. All segments contaminated with electro-oculographic or muscle artifacts were eliminated. Segments with speech artifacts, which were induced by the NPSs of subjects collected during specific points throughout the tonic stimulation, were removed as well. Encompassing the entire temporal span of the five-minute long tonic EEG recordings, 60 artifact-free, one-second segments were selected for further analysis on each subject, with 20 segments randomly selected from each third of the recorded EEG. As changes in alpha activity may be visible on single epochs, selection of segments was randomized in order to avoid systemic bias. This procedure was repeated for all three recording conditions. After downsampling to 256 Hz, power spectral densities were computed by averaging the Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT) power spectra of the one-second data windows of all 60 artifact-free trials of each condition. Spectral windows were shifted in 0.125-second overlapping intervals. The **peak** amplitudes of the alpha-band power­density curves were calculated, as well as their corresponding frequencies. The present study aimed at investigating whether **PAF** values induced by tonic noxious thermal stimuli could serve as an objective cortical measure associated with subjective perception of tonic heat pain. Accordingly, analyses focus only on the PAF measure. The analyzed alpha-band frequencies were defined as 7.5­12.0 Hz.

analysis of variance (RM-ANOVA) was performed in order to identify significant differences between the three NPSs collected throughout the application of tonic stimuli, and a two-way RM-ANOVA tested significant differences between the **PAF** values in the three corresponding epochs within each recording condition, which were subsequently averaged for analysis; these RM-ANOVAs incorporated Segment (either third of the recorded data) × Recording electrode location (Cz, C3, C4, T7, T8, Fp1, or Fp2). Changes in PAF values were evaluated using a two-way RM-ANOVA incorporating Condition (resting-state, innocuous stimulation, or noxious stimulation) ×Recording electrode location (Cz, C3, C4, T7, T8, Fp1, or Fp2). PAF values were compared under each condition at each electrode location when there was a significant Condition ×Recording electrode location interaction. All ANOVAs were performed using the Tukey­Kramer test to correct for multiple comparisons. Relationships between continuous variables (NPSs of the noxious condition, PAF values, and `pain-60' temperatures) were assessed using linear regressions and Pearson correlations, with P-values corrected for multiple comparisons using the Bonferroni method. Specifically, two correlations examined the study question of whether PAF values induced by tonic noxious thermal stimuli could serve as an objective cortical measure associated with the subjective perception of tonic heat pain: (1) between PAF values obtained during the application of tonic noxious stimulation and the induced NPSs; and (2) between baseline PAF values attained during resting-state, i.e. throughout a stimulation-free condition, and NPSs induced by the tonic noxious stimulation in a separate session. A paired two-tailed t-test was used to compare the grandaverage of the pain ratings collected during the `pain-60' intensity and the fourth overall NPS collected after the stimulus ending. The present study did not aim at addressing differences in the examined parameters as a function of gender. Means and standard deviations (SD) were computed for the various parameters of the study data. Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05.

Angelakis, E., Lubar, J.F., Stathopoulou, S., Kuonios, J., 2004. **Peak** alpha frequency: an electroencephalographic measure of cognitive preparedness. Clin. Neurophysiol. 115, 887­897.

oscillations in brain functioning: an integrative theory. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 26, 5­29. Baar, E., Baar-Eroglu, C., Karaka, S., Schürmann, M., 2000. Brain oscillations in perception and memory. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 35, 95­124. Baar, E., Baar-Eroglu, C., Karaka, S., Schürmann, M., 2001. Gamma, alpha, delta, and theta oscillations govern cognitive processes. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 39, 241­248. Billiot, K.M., Budzynski, T.H., Andrasik, F., 1997. EEG patterns and chronic fatigue syndrome. J. Neurother. 2, 20­30. Biswal, B., Yetkin, F.Z., Haughton, V.M., Hyde, J.S., 1995. Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI. Magn. Reson. Med. 34, 537­541. Chang, P.F., Arendt-Nielsen, L., Graven-Nielsen, T., Svensson, P., Chen, A.C.N., 2001a. Topographic effects of tonic cutaneous nociceptive stimulation on human electroencephalograph. Neurosci. Lett. 305, 49­52. Chang, P.F., Arendt-Nielsen, L., Graven-Nielsen, T., Svensson, P., Chen, A.C.N., 2001b. Different EEG topographic effects of painful and non-painful intramuscular stimulation in man. Exp. Brain Res. 141, 195­203. Chang, P.F., Arendt-Nielsen, L., Chen, A.C.N., 2002a. Dynamic changes and spatial correlation of EEG activities during cold pressor test in man. Brain Res. Bull. 57, 667­675. Chang, P.F., Arendt-Nielsen, L., Chen, A.C.N., 2002b. Differential cerebral responses to aversive auditory arousal versus muscle pain: specific EEG patterns area associated with human pain processing. Exp. Brain Res. 147, 387­393. Chen, A.C.N., Rappelsberger, P., 1994. Brain and human pain: topographic EEG amplitude and coherence mapping. Brain Topogr. 7, 129­140. Chen, A.C.N., Rappelsberger, P., Filz, O., 1998. Topology of EEG coherence changes may reflect differential neural network activation in cold and pain perception. Brain Topogr. 11, 125­132. Cheyne, D., Gaetz, W., Garnero, L., Lachaux, J.P., Ducorps, A., Schwartz, D., Varela, F.J., 2003. Neuromagnetic imaging of cortical oscillations accompanying tactile stimulation. Brain Res. Cogn. Brain Res. 17, 599­611. Clark, C.R., Veltmeyer, M.D., Hamilton, R.J., Simms, E., Paul, R., Hermens, D., Gordon, E., 2004. Spontaneous alpha **peak** frequency predicts working memory performance across the age span. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 53, 1­9. Craig, K.D., 2006. Emotions and psychobiology. In: McMahon, S.B., Koltzenburg, M. (Eds.), Wall and Melzack's Textbook of Pain. Elsevier/ Churchill Livingstone, Philadelphia, pp. 231­240. Damoiseaux, J.S., Rombouts, S.A., Barkhof, F., Scheltens, P., Stam, C.J., Smith, S.M., Beckmann, C.F., 2006. Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 13848­13853. De Luca, M., Smith, S., De Stefano, N., Federico, A., Matthews, P.M., 2005. Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system. Exp. Brain Res. 167, 587­594. De Luca, M., Beckmann, C.F., De Stefano, N., Matthews, P.M., Smith, S.M., 2006. fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain. Neuroimage 15, 1359­1367. Dowman, R., Rissacher, D., Schuckers, S., 2008. EEG indices of tonic pain-related activity in the somatosensory cortices. Clin. Neurophysiol. 119, 1201­1212. Dustman, R.E., Shearer, D.E., Emmerson, R.Y., 1999. Life-span changes in EEG spectral amplitude, amplitude variability and **mean frequenc**y. Clin. Neurophysiol. 110, 1399­1409. Feige, B., Scheffler, K., Esposito, F., Di Salle, F.D., Hennig, J., Seifritz, E., 2005. Cortical and subcortical correlates of electroencephalographic alpha rhythm modulation. J. Neurophysiol. 93, 2864­2872. Flor, H., Turk, D.C., 2006. Cognitive and Learning Aspects. In:

Osaka, M., 1984. **Peak** alpha frequency of EEG during a mental task: task difficulty and hemispheric differences. Psychophysiology 21, 101­105.

Osaka, M., Osaka, N., Koyama, S., Okusa, T., Kakigi, R., 1999. Individual differences in working memory and the **peak** alpha frequency shift on magnetoencephalography. Cognit. Brain. Res. 8, 365­368.

Posthuma, D., Neale, M.C., Boomsma, D.I., de Geus, E.J.C., 2001. Are smarter brains running faster? Heritability of alpha **peak** frequency, IQ, and their interrelation. Behav. Genet. 31, 567­579.

Suldo, S.M., Olson, L.A., Evans, J.R., 2001. Quantitative EEG evidence of increased alpha **peak** frequency in children with precociously reading ability. J. Neurother. 5, 39­50.


